ADR 071: Proposer-based Timestamps (#6799)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/architecture/adr-071-proposer-based-timestamps.md

For precommits, this timestamp is used to construct the [CommitSig that is included in the block in the LastCommit](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/e8013281281985e3ada7819f42502b09623d24a0/types/block.go#L754) field.
For prevotes, this field is unused.
Proposer-based timestamps will use the [RoundState.Proposal](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/c3ae6f5b58e07b29c62bfdc5715b6bf8ae5ee951/internal/consensus/types/round_state.go#L76) timestamp to construct the `signedBytes` `CommitSig`.
This timestamp is therefore no longer useful and will be dropped.

`Vote` will be updated as follows:

```diff
type Vote struct {
	Type             tmproto.SignedMsgType `json:"type"`
	Height           int64                 `json:"height"`
	Round            int32                 `json:"round"`    
	BlockID          BlockID               `json:"block_id"` // zero if vote is nil.
--	Timestamp        time.Time             `json:"timestamp"`
	ValidatorAddress Address               `json:"validator_address"`
	ValidatorIndex   int32                 `json:"validator_index"`
	Signature        []byte                `json:"signature"`
}

> ```

Author: I think the discussion that the signed bytes includes information encoding the timestamp _should_ be enough info here. 

That's a good point and may be worth considering as we move towards implementing this.

A proposal timestamp is considered `timely` if it is within `PRECISION` and `MSGDELAY` of the Unix time known to the validator.
More specifically, a proposal timestamp is `timely` if `validatorLocalTime - PRECISION < proposalTime < validatorLocalTime + PRECISION + MSGDELAY`. 

Because the `PRECISION` and `MSGDELAY` parameters must be the same across all validators, they will be added to the [consensus parameters](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/proto/tendermint/types/params.proto#L13) as [durations](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/google.protobuf#google.protobuf.Duration).

The proposer-based timestamp specification also includes a [new ACCURACY parameter](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/master/spec/consensus/proposer-based-timestamp/pbts-sysmodel_001_draft.md#pbts-clocksync-external0).
Intuitively, `ACCURACY` represents the difference between the ‘real’ time and the currently known time of correct validators.
The currently known Unix time of any validator is always somewhat different from real time.
`ACCURACY` is the largest such difference between each validator's time and real time taken as an absolute value. 

> This is not something a computer can determine on its own and must be specified as an estimate by the user of Tendermint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not something a computer can determine on its own and must be specified as an estimate by the community and developers of a Tendermint chain.
```

The timeout in `enterPropose` will then be set as the maximum of `waitingTime` and the [configured proposal step timeout](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/dc7c212c41a360bfe6eb38a6dd8c709bbc39aae7/config/config.go#L1013).

### Changes to validation rules

The rules for validating that a proposal is valid will need slight modification to implement proposer-based timestamps.
Specifically, we will change the validation logic to ensure that the proposal timestamp is `timely` and we will modify the way the block timestamp is validated as well.

#### Proposal timestamp validation

Adding proposal timestamp validation is a reasonably straightforward change.
The current Unix time known to the proposer is already included in the [Proposal message](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/dc7c212c41a360bfe6eb38a6dd8c709bbc39aae7/types/proposal.go#L31).
Once the proposal is received, the complete message is stored in the `RoundState.Proposal` field.
The precommit and prevote validation logic does not currently use this timestamp.
This validation logic will be updated to check that the proposal timestamp is within `PRECISION` of the current Unix time known to the validators.

> If the timestamp is not within `PRECISION` of the current Unix time known to the validator, the validator proposal will considered it valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the timestamp is not within `PRECISION` of the current Unix time known to the validator, the proposal will not be considered valid.
```
Did you mean this?

Reviewer: If the proposal is untimely but the rest of the block is valid, do we still keep the block for future rounds?

Author: yes, thanks for the catch!

* Case 2:  Validator has a locked block and receives a valid proposal matching its locked block.
* Case 3:  Validator has a locked block, sees a valid proposal not matching its locked block but sees +⅔ prevotes for the new proposal’s block. 

The only change we will make to the prevote step is to what a validator considers a valid proposal as detailed above.

### Changes to the precommit step

The precommit step will not require much modification.
Its proposal validation rules will change in the same ways that validation will change in the prevote step.

### Changes to locking a block
When a validator receives a valid proposed block and +2/3 prevotes for that block, it stores the block as its ‘locked block’ in the [RoundState.ValidBlock](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/e8013281281985e3ada7819f42502b09623d24a0/internal/consensus/types/round_state.go#L85) field.
In each subsequent round it will prevote that block.
A validator will only change which block it has locked if it sees +2/3 prevotes for a different block.

This mechanism will remain largely unchanged.
The only difference is the addition of proposal timestamp validation.

> A validator will prevote nil in a round if the proposal message it received is not `timely`.

Reviewer: But will still remain locked to that `BlockID` right?

# ADR 71: Proposer-Based Timestamps

## Changelog

 - July 15 2021: Created by @williambanfield 
 - Aug 4 2021: Draft completed by @williambanfield
 - Aug 5 2021: Draft updated to include data structure changes by @williambanfield

## Status

 * Proposed

## Context

Tendermint currently provides a monotonically increasing source of time known as [BFTTime](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/master/spec/consensus/bft-time.md).
This mechanism for producing a source of time is reasonably simple.
Each correct validator adds a timestamp to each `Precommit` message it sends.
The timestamp it sends is either the validator's local time or one millisecond greater than the previous block time, depending on which value is greater.

> When a block is produced, its block timestamp is chosen as the weighted median of the times in all of the `Precommit` message.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a block is produced, the proposer chooses the block timestamp as the weighted median of the times in all of the `Precommit` messages the proposer received.
```

Author: Done.

Proposer-based timestamps alter the current mechanism for producing block timestamps in two main ways:

1. The block proposer is amended to offer up its local time as the timestamp for the next block. 
1. Correct validators only approve the proposed block timestamp if it is close enough to their own local view of time. 

The result of these changes is a more meaningful timestamp that cannot be controlled by `<= 2/3` of the validator voting power. 
This document outlines the necessary code changes in Tendermint to implement the corresponding [proposer-based timestamps specification](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/tree/master/spec/consensus/proposer-based-timestamp).

## Alternative Approaches

### Remove timestamps altogether

Computer clocks are bound to skew for a variety of reasons.
Using timestamps in our protocol means either accepting the timestamps as not reliable or impacting the protocol’s liveness guarantees.
This design requires impacting the protocol’s liveness in order to make the timestamps more reliable.
An alternate approach is to remove timestamps altogether from the block protocol.
`BFTTime` is deterministic but may be arbitrarily inaccurate.

> This approach was not selected because a reliable source of time is quite useful for blockchain applications.

Reviewer 2: "This approach was not selected because..." I am not sure why there is a "not" in the sentence.

Reviewer: I think @williambanfield is referring to the approach of not having any timestamp in Tendermint at all

> This approach was not selected because a reliable source of time is quite useful for blockchain applications.

Author: > "Time" as a signifier of order within the consensus protocol... 
> For this design, I think (1) is the important axis: We already couldn't distinguish between ambient clock skew and a node intentionally choosing a "wrong" time for some reason.

We effectively already have a way to determine the order of the records in the consensus protocol, the block height. The current `BFTTime` implementation also _does_ gives us an ordering of blocks already because it is monotonically increasing. Since we can already derive an ordering given the current block data I don't think it would be worth making this change _solely_ on the understanding that it produces an order of blocks. Based on the other comments in the doc, it seems possible I did not clarify strongly enough why it's important to include a more accurate view of time from a blockchain protocol and application perspective. As Josef mentioned, light client and IBC depend on time for verification. They check that their local time is within a bound of the block they are verifying. I can add some additional information on this for clarity into the document.

> This approach was not selected because a reliable source of time is quite useful for blockchain applications.

Author: @creachadair I added some additional uses for a meaningful source of time in blockchain protocols and applications. I'm going to resolve this comment thread for now. Please re-open if this seems insufficient.

Time is much more meaningful to humans than block height.
Applications may wish for some transactions to occur on a certain day, on a regular period, or after some time following a different event.
All of these require some meaningful representation of agreed upon time.

> Additionally, many block chain protocols rely on a concept of ‘time’.

Reviewer: There are examples in the following line but to add to that another good case is calculating inflation. People want this to be something like 7% per anum not 7% per 1000 blocks (especially as block time may vary)

Specifically, unbonding of delegated staked assets occurs after a period of days, not heights.

## Decision

> No Decision. 

Reviewer: lol - yeah the decision should be to implement proposer based timestamps in favor of BFTTime

> No Decision. 

Author: Ah! I figured this would be filled in after some deliberation. Changed.

## Detailed Design

### Overview

Implementing proposer-based timestamps will require a few changes to Tendermint’s code.

> These changes will be to the state package, the vote types, and to the consensus parameters.

Reviewer 3: nit: I'd make this a simple bulleted list in case it expands. Also easier to read.

Author: - [ ]  change to bulleted list.

### Proposal Timestamp and Block Timestamp

This design discusses two timestamps: (1) The timestamp in the block and (2) the timestamp in the proposal message.
The existence and use of both of these timestamps can get a bit confusing, so some background is given here to clarify their uses.

The [proposal message currently has a timestamp](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/e5312942e30331e7c42b75426da2c6c9c00ae476/types/proposal.go#L31).

> This timestamp is the local time of the proposer when sending the `Proposal` message.

Reviewer 2: Being more precise definitely makes sense here.

> This timestamp is the local time of the proposer when sending the `Proposal` message.

Author: Updated in all places.

This timestamp is not currently used as part of consensus.
The changes in this ADR will begin using the proposal message timestamp as part of consensus.
We will refer to this as the **proposal timestamp** throughout this design.

The block has a timestamp field [in the header](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/dc7c212c41a360bfe6eb38a6dd8c709bbc39aae7/types/block.go#L338).
This timestamp is set currently as part of Tendermint’s `BFTtime` algorithm.
It is set when a block is proposed and it is checked by the validators when they are deciding to prevote the block.
This field will continue to be used but the logic for creating and validating this timestamp will change.
We will refer to this as the **block timestamp** throughout this design.

At a high level, the proposal timestamp from height `H` is used as the block timestamp at height `H+1`.
The following image shows this relationship.
The rest of this document describes the code changes that will make this possible.

> ![](./img/pbts-message.png)

Reviewer 3: nit: I would avoid using a transparent background as GH has the option for "Dark" mode (which I use) making it impossible to view certain aspects. I'd make it a white background 👍

Changes to the `CommitSig` and `Commit` struct are detailed below. 

### Changes to CommitSig

The [CommitSig](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/a419f4df76fe4aed668a6c74696deabb9fe73211/types/block.go#L604) struct currently contains a timestamp. 
This timestamp is the local time of the validator when it issued a `Precommit` for the block.
This timestamp is no longer used and will be removed in this change.

`CommitSig` currently contains the following fields: 

```go
type CommitSig struct {
	BlockIDFlag      BlockIDFlag `json:"block_id_flag"`
	ValidatorAddress Address     `json:"validator_address"`
	Timestamp        time.Time   `json:"timestamp"`
	Signature        []byte      `json:"signature"`
}
```

`CommitSig` will be updated to contain the following fields: 

```go
type CommitSig struct {
	BlockIDFlag      BlockIDFlag `json:"block_id_flag"`
	ValidatorAddress Address     `json:"validator_address"`
	Signature        []byte      `json:"signature"`
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: nit: instead of having a before and after struct type, I would simply use the output of `git diff` as markdown supports the `diff` code type.

Author: Done!

### Changes to Commit

The [Commit](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/a419f4df76fe4aed668a6c74696deabb9fe73211/types/block.go#L746) struct does not currently contain a timestamp. 
The timestamps in the `Commit.CommitSig` entries are currently used to build the block timestamp.
With these timestamps removed, the commit time will instead be stored in the `Commit` struct.

`Commit` currently contains the following fields: 

```go
type Commit struct {
	Height     int64       `json:"height"`
	Round      int32       `json:"round"`
	BlockID    BlockID     `json:"block_id"`
	Signatures []CommitSig `json:"signatures"`
}
```

`Commit` will be updated to contain the following fields: 

```go
type Commit struct {
	Height     int64       `json:"height"`
	Round      int32       `json:"round"`

> 	Timestamp   time.Time   `json:"round"`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	Timestamp   time.Time   `json:"timestamp"` 
 ```

	BlockID    BlockID     `json:"block_id"`
	Signatures []CommitSig `json:"signatures"`
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: ditto

### Changes to `Vote` messages

`Precommit` and `Prevote` messages use a common [Vote struct](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/a419f4df76fe4aed668a6c74696deabb9fe73211/types/vote.go#L50).
This struct currently contains a timestamp.
This timestamp is set using the [voteTime](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/e8013281281985e3ada7819f42502b09623d24a0/internal/consensus/state.go#L2241) function and therefore vote times correspond to the validator’s local time.
For precommits, this timestamp is used to construct the [CommitSig that is included in the block in the LastCommit](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/e8013281281985e3ada7819f42502b09623d24a0/types/block.go#L754) field.
For prevotes, this field is unused.
Proposer-based timestamps will use the [RoundState.Proposal](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/c3ae6f5b58e07b29c62bfdc5715b6bf8ae5ee951/internal/consensus/types/round_state.go#L76) timestamp to construct the `signedBytes` `CommitSig`.
This timestamp is therefore no longer useful and will be dropped.

`Vote` currently contains the following fields:

```go
type Vote struct {

> 	Type             tmproto.SignedMsgType `json:"type"`

Author: I would tend to agree. It looks like here `SignedMsgType` [is an enum](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/88de028545a09e73c713e3c80366ec54a7836d06/proto/tendermint/types/types.proto#L24) and the methods act [on the type itself](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/88de028545a09e73c713e3c80366ec54a7836d06/proto/tendermint/types/types.pb.go#L65), not a pointer.

> 	Type             tmproto.SignedMsgType `json:"type"`

Reviewer 5: Oh, oops, yes—an enum is just an integer.

	Height           int64                 `json:"height"`
	Round            int32                 `json:"round"`    
	BlockID          BlockID               `json:"block_id"` // zero if vote is nil.
	Timestamp        time.Time             `json:"timestamp"`
	ValidatorAddress Address               `json:"validator_address"`
	ValidatorIndex   int32                 `json:"validator_index"`
	Signature        []byte                `json:"signature"`
}
```

`Vote` will be changed to contain the following fields:

```go
type Vote struct {
	Type             tmproto.SignedMsgType `json:"type"`
	Height           int64                 `json:"height"`
	Round            int32                 `json:"round"` // proposal/vote round   
	ForBlock         bool                  `json:"for_block"` // false if vote is nil.
	ValidatorIndex   int32                 `json:"validator_index"`
	Signature        []byte                `json:"signature"`
}
```

> `BlockID` is also dropped as it is also stored by all validators.

Reviewer 6: should we keep the scope of this ADR to proposer timestamps? We can do clean up at a later stage or at the same time. the scope of removing some of these things can be large.

Reviewer 4: I am not sure if we can remove `BlockID` from the vote. How a process is then able to say for what block it is voting?

Author: This may be overkill for this change, I'm not sure. Validators receive a proposal each round and store the proposal. The proposal contains a `BlockID`. The signed bytes used to generate the vote signature contains a hash of the `BlockID`. Since all validators are already saving the `BlockID` in the propose message, they should be able to use their locally stored `BlockID` information to generate the signedBytes and validate the vote signature against that instead of also requiring it be part of the votes message.

Author: Removed these changes. We have an additional issue in progress related to removing additional fields from the block, #4835. can discuss these changes along with that work.

`ValidatorIndex` is all that is needed to determine `ValidatorAddress` so it is dropped as well.

### New consensus parameters

> The proposer-based timestamp specification includes multiple new parameters that must be the same among all validators.

Reviewer: There's an important distinction here. Params such as the block size are verifiable i.e. I know when a proposer is faulty and proposes a block too big. These params, however, are non-verifiable.  They are used to signal to honest nodes what value to run with but nodes don't validate the actual times that other nodes implement. If a node wants to use a different value, it can but this is theoretically classified as a faulty node whereby greater than 1/3+ _may_ cause the network to halt. The consensus mechanism should ensure that changes to these parameters are atomic. These could only be non atomic if there was a fork (which requires greater than 1/3) or the application was non-deterministic (which could halt the system).

> The proposer-based timestamp specification includes multiple new parameters that must be the same among all validators.

Author: To expand a bit on @cmwaters explanation: proposer's place a hash of their 'consensus params' into the block in the `consensus_hash` field. This hash is checked when a node [validates a block](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/18784f7fe0fa316994dd94cbd84573d87d7958d4/state/validation.go#L60). Validators check that the consensus hash matches their locally defined consensus hash and reject the block if there is a mismatch. This only verifies that what the proposer _reports_ as its consensus hash matches the validator's consensus hash. A malicious proposer could certainly report a hash of parameters that are different from the parameters it actually is acting with. I.e., it could include '20mb' as the max block size but then only prevote blocks that are 10mb or less. It's a mechanism to ensure correct validators agree but malicious ones can certainly bypass it and behave differently. 

> what can go wrong if validators are updated with different values for these parameters, and the update isn't atomic? Would changing these values potentially require a hard fork?

If correct validators are updated non-atomically, then there will be a split: updated validators will not prevote blocks proposed by non-updated validators and vice-versa. These types of changes require a coordinated upgrade: All nodes must agree on a height to perform the upgrade.

These parameters are `PRECISION`, `MSGDELAY`, and `ACCURACY`.

The `PRECISION` and `MSGDELAY` parameters are used to determine if the proposed timestamp is acceptable.
A validator will only Prevote a proposal if the proposal timestamp is considered `timely`.
A proposal timestamp is considered `timely` if it is within `PRECISION` and `MSGDELAY` of the validator’s local time.
More specifically, a proposal timestamp is `timely` if `validatorLocalTime - PRECISION < proposalTime < validatorLocalTime + PRECISION + MSGDELAY`. 

Because the `PRECISION` and `MSGDELAY` parameters must be the same across all validators, they will be added to the [consensus parameters](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/proto/tendermint/types/params.proto#L13) as [durations](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/google.protobuf#google.protobuf.Duration).

The proposer-based timestamp specification also includes a [new ACCURACY parameter](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/master/spec/consensus/proposer-based-timestamp/pbts-sysmodel_001_draft.md#pbts-clocksync-external0).

> `ACCURACY` represents the difference between the ‘real’ time and the local time of correct validators.

Reviewer 2: In the specification, accuracy is defined under [[PBTS-CLOCKSYNC-EXTERNAL.0]](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/master/spec/consensus/proposer-based-timestamp/pbts-sysmodel_001_draft.md#pbts-clocksync-external0).

> `ACCURACY` represents the difference between the ‘real’ time and the local time of correct validators.

Reviewer: > do we (the network) have to choose the maximum absolute offset?

In a short answer, yes

> `ACCURACY` represents the difference between the ‘real’ time and the local time of correct validators.

Author: Updated the discussion to include description of accuracy as an absolute value over all validators.

This is not something a computer can determine on its own and must be specified as an estimate by the user of Tendermint.
It is used in the new algorithm to [calculate a timeout for the propose step](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/blob/master/spec/consensus/proposer-based-timestamp/pbts-algorithm_001_draft.md#pbts-alg-startround0).
`ACCURACY` is assumed to be the same across all validators and therefore should be included as a consensus parameter.

The consensus will be updated to include this `Timestamp` field as follows:

```go
type ConsensusParams struct {
	Block     BlockParams     `json:"block"`
	Evidence  EvidenceParams  `json:"evidence"`
	Validator ValidatorParams `json:"validator"`
	Version   VersionParams   `json:"version"`
	Timestamp TimestampParams `json:"timestamp"`
}
```

```go
type TimestampParams struct {
	Accuracy  time.Duration `json:"accuracy"`
	Precision time.Duration `json:"precision"`

> 	MsgDelay  time.Duration `json:"msg_delay"`

Reviewer: I wrote a comment on this point here: https://github.com/tendermint/spec/issues/265#issuecomment-893442430

The gist is that it should be the maximum possible time it takes for a proposal to go from any possible proposer to at least 2/3 of the network. In a gossip network it may go through two or three nodes who must also first validate it before it reaches a node

}
```

### Changes to Header

The [Header](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/a419f4df76fe4aed668a6c74696deabb9fe73211/types/block.go#L338) struct currently contains a timestamp.
This timestamp is set as the `BFTtime` derived from the block's `LastCommit.CommitSig` timestamps.
This timestamp will no longer be derived from the `LastCommit.CommitSig` timestamps and will instead be included directly into the block's `LastCommit`. 

> This timestamp can therefore be dropped from the header as it will be redundant information stored in both the `Header` and the `LastCommit`.

Reviewer 4: It might make sense leaving a timestamp in the header even if it's redundant, as it might simplify developer ergonomics for use cases that require access to time and header (for example light client related use cases).

Author: That likely makes sense. I'm wondering if it's worth changing the name of the field in the header to `last_timestamp` to match the current `last_block_id` so that it's clear that the source of the timestamp is the last block? I continually find myself getting tripped up on the `H`/`H+1` distinction of these fields.

Reviewer 2: In the lightclient the Time field is used. I am not sure where else. I think it makes sense to keep it as is.

}
```

### Changes to the block proposal step

#### Proposer selects proposal timestamp

The proposal logic already [sets the validator’s local time](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/2abfe20114ee3bb3adfee817589033529a804e4d/types/proposal.go#L44) into the `Proposal` message.
This satisfies the proposer-based timestamp specification and does not need to change. 

#### Proposer selects block timestamp

The proposal timestamp that was decided in height `H-1` will be stored in the `State` struct's in the `RoundState.LastCommit` field.
The proposer will select this timestamp to use as the block timestamp at height `H`.

#### Proposer waits

Block timestamps must be monotonically increasing.
In `BFTTime`, if a validator’s clock was behind, the [validator added 1 millisecond to the previous block’s time and used that in its vote messages](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/e8013281281985e3ada7819f42502b09623d24a0/internal/consensus/state.go#L2246).
A goal of adding proposer-based timestamps is to enforce some degree of clock synchronization, so having a mechanism that completely ignores the validator’s local time no longer works.

> Validator clocks may not be perfectly in sync.

Reviewer: Haha love this

> Validator clocks may not be perfectly in sync.

Author: Agreed, great change.

The timeout in `enterPropose` will then be set as the maximum of `waitingTime` and the [configured proposal step timeout](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/dc7c212c41a360bfe6eb38a6dd8c709bbc39aae7/config/config.go#L1013).

### Changes to validation rules

The rules for validating that a proposal is valid will need slight modification to implement proposer-based timestamps.
Specifically, we will change the validation logic to ensure that the proposal timestamp is `timely` and we will modify the way the block timestamp is validated as well.

#### Proposal timestamp validation

Adding proposal timestamp validation is a reasonably straightforward change.
The proposer’s local time is already included in the [Proposal message](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/dc7c212c41a360bfe6eb38a6dd8c709bbc39aae7/types/proposal.go#L31).
Once the proposal is received, the complete message is stored in the `RoundState.Proposal` field.
The precommit and prevote validation logic does not currently use this timestamp.
This validation logic will be updated to check that the proposal timestamp is within `PRECISION` of the validator’s local time.

> If the timestamp is not within `PRECISION` of the validator’s local time, the proposal will not be considered valid.

Reviewer 3: We should mention the validator will vote nil, correct?

Author: Updated! This is effectively the same as it is now but with changes to the rules for validating the proposal message.

### Remove voteTime Completely

[voteTime](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/822893615564cb20b002dd5cf3b42b8d364cb7d9/internal/consensus/state.go#L2229) is a mechanism for calculating the next `BFTTime` given both the current local time and the previous block timestamp.
If the previous block timestamp is greater than the local time, then voteTime returns a value one millisecond greater than the previous block timestamp.
This logic is used in multiple places and is no longer needed for proposer-based timestamps.
It should therefore be removed completely.

## Future Improvements

* Implement BLS signature aggregation.
By removing fields from the `Precommit` messages, we are able to aggregate signatures.

## Consequences

### Positive

* `<2/3` of validators can no longer influence block timestamps.
* Block timestamp will have stronger correspondence to real time.
* Improves the reliability of light client block verification.
* Enables BLS signature aggregation.
* Enables evidence handling to use time instead of height for evidence validity.

### Neutral

* Alters Tendermint’s liveness properties.

> Liveness now requires that all correct validators have synchronized clocks within a bound.

Reviewer 2: Previously, unsynchronized clocks had no effect on liveness. Now, if a validator believes that a proposal is too early or too late, it will ignore it. If too many do so, there will be no progress.
